
Flexible Working Policy and Procedure

1.      Introduction
1.1.    Diamond recognises the importance of a good work life balance for employees.  Flexible working can increase staff motivation, promote work-life balance, reduce employee stress and improve performance and productivity.

1.2.    Flexible working can incorporate a number of possible changes to working arrangements, for example (but not limited to) a variation of working hours which could be a reduction or an increase; or a variation of the days worked. 

1.3.    In managing the flexible working process and associated conversations, managers and employees should engage in constructive dialogue/interactions that are consistent with, and which uphold, the Diamond Values and Behaviours.

2.      Purpose
2.1.    The purpose of flexible working is to help employees maintain a good work life balance whilst ensuring that the Company achieves its core business purpose as efficiently as possible.  The purpose of his Policy and Procedure is to ensure a consistent approach in relation to managing requests for flexible working, thereby ensuring the effective management and processing of flexible working requests; and helping to ensure that both legal and Company requirements are met.

3.      Scope
3.1.    This Policy and Procedure applies to all Diamond employees (i.e. those employed on a Diamond contract of employment) including those on fixed-term contracts.  It does not apply to agency workers, consultants or self-employed contractors.

3.2.    This Policy and Procedure is not contractual and does not form part of an employee’s terms and conditions of employment; and may be subject to change at the discretion of Diamond.

3.3.    The content of this Policy and Procedure is not exhaustive.  Instances may occur that fall outside of the areas covered in this document.  Diamond reserves the right, whilst acting fairly and reasonably, to take such measures as are necessary in each individual case.

4.      Other related policies and procedures
4.1.    Homeworking Policy and Procedure
4.2.    All forms referred to within this document can be found on the Intranet under HR Forms.

5.      Definitions
5.1.    For the purposes of this Policy and Procedure, the following definitions shall apply:
5.1.1.  Diamond: Diamond Light Source Ltd.
5.1.2.  Diamond Employee:  Any person working for Diamond under a contract of employment. Herein referred to as ‘employee(s)’;
5.1.3.  “Manager(s)” and “Group Leader(s)” are generic terms.  Group Leader means Group Leader or equivalent.





6.      Eligibility
6.1.    To be eligible to make a formal request for flexible working, an employee must meet the following criteria:

6.1.1.  be a Diamond employee;
6.1.2.  have a minimum of 26 weeks' continuous service with Diamond at the date of  their flexible working application;
6.1.3.  not have made another application for flexible working within the previous 12 months.

6.2.    Where the request is being made by a disabled person as part of a request for a reasonable adjustment to his/her working arrangements, the employee should state this in their written application.

6.3.    An eligible employee is limited to making one flexible working application every 12 months even if a second request in this period is for a different caring responsibility.  The 12 month period will be counted from the date of the employee’s Flexible Working Application Form.

6.4.    In making a flexible working request, if an employee is dishonest and/or misleads the Company, disciplinary action may be taken.

7.      Process 
7.1.    Before making a flexible working application an employee should think carefully about their desired working pattern and the impact of this, as any changes resulting from applications that are agreed by Diamond will normally become permanent (subject to the successful completion of any trial period; and depending on whether the request has been made for a permanent or temporary change).  If the employee’s hours of work are reduced as a result, this will affect the employee’s salary, pension contributions, annual leave and bank holiday entitlements.  Employees are advised to check the impact of any variation to contractual hours on their pension(s) with the relevant pension scheme administrators.

7.2.    An employee should apply in writing using the Flexible Working Application Form.  Applications should be submitted in good time; and ideally at least two months before the date the employee wishes to commence the flexible working arrangements.

7.3.    When making a flexible working application, the employee must present a reasoned case that includes the following:

•       state that it is an application for flexible working and explain the reasons why they are making the request;
•       provide details of their current working pattern (days/hours/times worked) and the working pattern they would like to work in the future and the date on which it is proposed the change should become effective;
•       explain what effect, if any, the proposed change would have on their division/group, colleagues, and how, in their opinion, any such effect might be dealt with;
•       provide an explanation of how business needs can still be met if the request is agreed;
•       state whether they have made a previous application whilst they have worked for the Company (and the date of that application); and
•       sign and date their request.

7.4.    An employee who submits a flexible working request to work from home, should also read and adhere to the provisions within Diamond’s Homeworking Policy and Procedure.

7.5.    The employee should submit their completed application form to their immediate manager who should discuss the request with their Divisional Director and HR.

7.6.    Provided that the flexible working request meets the eligibility criteria outlined in section 6 above, the line manager will consider proposed flexible working arrangements in a reasonable manner, which will involve carefully weighing up the potential benefits to the employee and to Diamond against any adverse impact of implementing the changes.  Each flexible working request will be considered on a case-by-case basis: agreeing to one request will not set a precedent or create the right for another employee to be granted a similar change to his/her working pattern.  

7.7.    Where a request can without further discussion be approved in the terms stated in the employee's written application, a meeting will not normally be necessary.

7.8.    Where further information is required to consider a flexible working application, the employee’s line manager will meet the employee to explain what additional or amended information he/she needs to provide and ask the employee to resubmit the request.

7.9.    If a flexible working request cannot be agreed without further discussion, a formal meeting to discuss the request and consider alternative options will be arranged by the line manager within 28 days of the date of the employee’s flexible working application.  The line manager may also suggest an alternative or modified flexible working proposal to the employee.  The outcome of the formal meeting will be confirmed to the employee in writing within 14 days of the meeting; unless an extension is agreed. 

7.10.   If a request for flexible working is agreed, and upon receipt of the completed and authorised flexible working application form from the line manager, HR will confirm any change(s) in writing to the employee.  This correspondence will confirm the resulting changes to the employee’s terms and conditions of employment and the effective start date of the new working arrangements along with any associated trial period (See Section 10).  However if the request is refused, the line manager will confirm this in writing to the employee, setting out the ground(s) for the refusal, and details of the appeal procedure (see Section 12).

7.11.   Once a flexible working request has been agreed in writing, there is not an automatic right for the employee to revert to their previous working pattern at any point in the future.  

8.      Timescales
8.1.    Flexible working requests will be dealt with within a period of three months from first receipt to notification of the decision on appeal.  The line manager should hold the meeting within 28 days of receiving the request and notify the decision to the employee within 10 working days of the meeting, so that there is enough time for any appeal to be concluded.  Employees who are dissatisfied with the outcome of their request are allowed to lodge an appeal (see Section 12). The Timescales set out within this policy and procedure may be extended where both Diamond and the employee are in agreement.  For example, the relevant manager and the employee may agree to extend the time limit to give the employee a trial period on the flexible working arrangements.

9.      Accompaniment
9.1.    If a formal meeting is held to discuss a flexible working request, the employee will be entitled to be accompanied by a current workplace colleague or Trade Union representative. The companion may state the employee's case, respond to any view expressed and confer with the employee during the hearing, but not respond to questions on the employee's behalf.


9.2.    If the employee’s companion is not available to attend a formal meeting it will usually be rearranged within five working days.  Rescheduling meetings for the convenience of a specific representative is not guaranteed, but efforts will be made to accommodate a reasonable request. Should an employee fail to attend a meeting and any rescheduled meeting(s), Diamond reserves the right to make a decision (based on the information available) in the employee’s absence.

10.     Trial period
10.1.   Where a flexible working request or a modified flexible working proposal is agreed, Diamond will normally implement the new working arrangements on an initial trial basis.  This will allow Diamond to assess what the impact will be on the business and ensure that the new working arrangements meet the needs of Diamond and the employee. 

10.2.   During the trial period, any changes to an employee’s working arrangements and associated terms and conditions of employment will be temporary.

10.3.   If, in Diamond’s opinion, the trial is not successful because the flexible working arrangements cannot be accommodated for the business or operational reasons outlined in section 12 below, the employee will be notified in writing accordingly and will revert back to their previous terms and conditions of employment, unless an alternative arrangement is agreed. 

10.4.   If the requested change of working arrangements is accepted at the end of the trial period then the temporary terms and conditions will become permanent and this will be confirmed to the employee in writing.

11.     Rejection of the request
11.1.   Although Diamond will give full consideration to a request for flexible working, there may be occasions when a request may be refused. Diamond can refuse the request on one or more prescribed business reasons, which are:

11.1.1. the burden of additional costs:
11.1.2. the detrimental effect on ability to meet User/service demands;
11.1.3.  an inability to re-organise or re-distribute work among other existing staff;
11.1.4.  an inability to recruit additional staff;
11.1.5.  a detrimental impact on quality or performance;
11.1.6.  there is insufficient work for the periods the employee proposes to work; or
11.1.7.  a planned structural change to the business.

11.2.   A line manager must not reject a request for any other reason.

12.     The appeal process
12.1.   An employee will have the right of appeal if their request for flexible working is declined.  The appeal must be put in writing to the Head of HR within 10 working days of receipt of the decision notifying the employee of the outcome of their request, unless an extension is agreed.

12.2.   The notification of appeal must clearly state the grounds for the appeal.  The grounds on which an appeal can be heard are limited to:

12.2.1. a review of the reasonableness of the flexible working decision;
12.2.2. the employee has new information which was not available when the line manager made their decision;
12.2.3. the flexible working application was rejected based on incorrect facts;
12.2.4. the employee’s flexible working application was wrongly treated as withdrawn;
12.2.5. the flexible working procedure was not followed correctly.

12.3.   An appeal hearing will then be arranged within 10 working days of receipt of the employee’s appeal and the employee will be given the right to be accompanied to the appeal meeting by a current workplace colleague or Trade Union representative.

12.4.   The appeal hearing will normally be conducted by the Divisional Director or nominee who will confirm the outcome in writing within a further 10 working days of the appeal hearing (unless an extension has been agreed).

12.5.   There is no further right of appeal.

12.6.   The employee will not be able to make another formal request until 12 months after the date of their original application.

12.7.   Diamond reserves the right not to hold an appeal meeting if, upon consideration of an appeal notice, it is decided that an employee’s request can be agreed.

13.     Withdrawing a flexible working application
13.1.   A flexible working application will be considered withdrawn in the following circumstances:

13.1.1. the employee withdraws their application in writing;
13.1.2. the employee fails to attend a meeting, including an appeal meeting, and then fails to attend a rearranged meeting without good reason; or
13.1.3. the employee acts unreasonably by refusing to give the Company the information needed to fulfil the consideration of the request

13.2.   A withdrawn application will count towards an employee’s maximum entitlement of one flexible working application per year.  Therefore, an employee who withdraws their application will not be eligible to make another flexible working request for a further 12 months.  HR will write to the employee to confirm the withdrawal of an application and the associated reasons for the withdrawal. 

14.     Accessibility
14.1.   At Diamond we understand that there are differences amongst our employees in terms of the protected characteristics contained within the Equality Act 2010; i.e. age, disability, gender reassignment, marriage & civil partnerships, pregnancy & maternity, race, religion or belief, sex (gender) and/or sexual orientation. We therefore aim to deliver policies and services which are efficient and effective, accessible to all, and which meet our employee’s different needs.  If you need any help to understand this document or require any appropriate support please contact a member of the HR Team.

15.     Review
15.1.   This Policy and Procedure will be kept under review and may be revised as considered appropriate.

15.2.   Date last revised: June 2018.

